---
layout: post
title: 'Free/Open Source Government: part 1'
---

Several events for me in the last fortnight converged almost perfectly
on a common theme

1.  On Thursday 28 March The Register reported from an anonymous source,
    that the [British Standards Institute (BSI) would reverse their
    vote](http://www.channelregister.co.uk/2008/03/26/bsi_vote_yes_ooxml/)
    on the proposed DIS 29500 standard from 'No - with comments' to Yes.
    In response John Pugh MP, Liberal Democrat member wrote [a letter to
    the BSI Director urging BSI not to vote
    yes](http://www.computerworlduk.com/community/blogs/index.cfm?entryid=654).
2.  On Tuesday 1 April Pieter Hintjens, former FFII president gave a
    talk on ['Software Patents and Open
    Standards'](http://spring2008.ukuug.org/talk_abstracts.html#51) at
    the UKUUG Spring 08 conference.
3.  On Wednesday ISO announced that [Microsoft OOXML/Ecma 376 is to be
    approved as DIS
    29500](http://www.iso.org/iso/pressrelease.htm?refid=Ref1123).
4.  On Thursday David Cameron MP, Conservative leader gave a speech
    on '[Innovation and its role in public
    policy](http://www.nesta.org.uk/informing/webcasts/david_cameron/index.aspx)'
    to NEST. He said a Tory government would open UK government data and
    "We also want to see how open source methods can help overcome the
    massive problems in government IT programs."
5.  On Thursday evening [Material
    World](http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio4/science/thematerialworld.shtml)
    broadcast ['Redefining the
    Kilogram'](http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio4/science/thematerialworld_20080403.shtml)
    on efforts towards a better international standard of mass and
    weight.

The theme is how the Free/Open Source software movement might aid the
political establishment.<!--more-->

### Civil Service

I've worked as a civil servant for nearly 5 years; first as a system
adminstrator, then a DBA. I've seen and provided input to the lower
levels of IT decision making & procurement within an executive agency.
From afar I've followed media coverage of projects such as the NHS
National Program for IT (NPfIT) and the former Child Support Agency
(CSA) payments system. In that time I've learned that [Yes
Minister](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yes_Minister) is comic genius &
still highly applicable, to a civil service that is very conservative
(with a small c) about novel ideas. Large government IT projects
typically deliver late, over spend or under perform. Microsoft and other
large providers of closed source software are so deeply entrenched in
central government, that by default they're seen as the only choice, if
any choice is recognised

### Open Source

The civil service has made moves toward F/OSS, in 2004 the [Office of
Government Commerce (OGC)](http://www.ogc.gov.uk/) released a [policy
document](http://www.govtalk.gov.uk/policydocs/policydocs_document.asp?docnum=905)
that stated:

> "UK Government will consider OSS solutions alongside proprietary ones
> in IT procurements. Contracts will be awarded on a value for money
> basis."

I've never seen a case where this has been put into practice. With the
recent conservative announcement, all parties have made noises to some
degree about use of F/OSS. It would appear it is entering the
consciousness of the political establishment. However, more pertinant
than the issue of Free/Open Source software is the issue of how much
choice the civil service & government has in their software purchase.
Currently the choice is close to zero, because every team, agency, MP
and department have enourmous silos of Microsoft Office documents. Word,
Excel, Powerpoint & Outlook are the defacto industry standards. They're
proprietary, meaning that a single company controls them. Until this
changes we are all at Microsoft's mercy.

### Open Standards

The [International Organisation for Standards
(ISO)](http://www.iso.org/iso/home.htm) made a delayed
[announcement](http://www.iso.org/iso/pressrelease.htm?refid=Ref1123) on
Wednesday that baring any appeals, Microsoft Office OpenXML (OOXML) will
become DIS 29500. It will join the existing [OpenDocument Format
(ODF)/DIS 26300](http://opendocument.xml.org/) as an international
standard for document storage and interchange. MS OOXML passed amid
widespread process & voting irregularities amongst the national
standards bodies. Accusations of improper behaviour have been made
against against ISO, Microsoft & ODF supporters. As part of the
Microsoft anti trust investigation, the EU has asked questions of
Microsoft and the national bodies regarding voting on OOXML. This
relates to the kilogram, currently defined by a lump of metal in Paris,
because that most basic standard is being improved in the open following
rigorous scientific debate & evaluation. Listen to last Thursday's
material world of the low down, but I'm confident the new kilogram
standard will be trusted by all. Like the kilogram, the standard for our
office documents is central to our society. Billions in trade and public
expenditure are dependant on the software we choose and the standards to
which it conforms. If we can't that trust the standard is sound then we
can't have the freedom to choose our software. Our software will
continue to control us, instead of putting us in control.
