---
title: 'Tiscali: Cheap and crap'
---

I'll admit it, I'm cheap when it comes to telecommunication. I generally
look for the line rental refund when renewing my mobile and I hate
paying line rental to BT. Two years ago I moved house, outside the area
cabled by Blueyonder, who were great. First I tried Orange broadband,
which was free with my mobile phone. It was slow and the supplied router
was a bit flaky. Last year I jumped ship to T-Mobile, Â£20/month covered
line rental and 1 Mbit broadband - bargain! Setup was a hassle, they
took several weeks to activate the line, but once it worked I was
content. In October they started faking DNS results, to stick
advertising in place of the browser's error page. In January they
'upgraded' many users to 'ADSL Max, upto 8 Mbit.' Thats when the real
trouble started, widespread throttling and intermittent connections have
since been the norm. The [tiscali support
forum](http://www.tiscali.co.uk/forums/forumdisplay.php?f=215) is
flooded with faults and complaints. The 0870 support line is congested
and useless, it's just clueless Indians parroting their scripts: reboot,
reset the router, retry, engineers are working on the problem, wait 24
hours etc. Meanwhile the [tiscali status
page](http://www.tiscali.co.uk/cgi-bin/status.cgi) reports all is well,
100% service. Time to jump ship again. Thank heck for Web n Walk. A
useful post, to make up for this rant, will shortly follow.
