---
title: 'The IBM compatible PC, catching the Amiga since 1992'
---

Around 1992 my second computer was an [Amiga
500+](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amiga_500+), a lovely machine. It
beat the pants off any PC at the time, particularly for playing
Lemmings. Many Amigas used a television for their display, as a result
they could run at a super high
[interlaced](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interlace) resolution. This
looked awful and induced headaches. Interlacing is a fairly good
[compromise for television shows and
movies](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/720p#720p_versus_1080i), it's
terrible for sharp graphics such as a computer desktop. Nevertheless, in
2008, I'm pleased to say that the latest [Linux drivers
v169.07](http://www.nvidia.com/object/linux_display_ia32_169.07.html) by
Nvidia support an interlaced display. These drivers are in Ubuntu Gutsy.
This has meant my mythical MythTV computer is finally displaying in HD,
at the native resolution of 1920 x 1080 interlaced, aka
[1080i](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1080i). The interlacing causes a
shimmering during fade effects or vertical motion, it's distracting but
bearable. This isn't the *big* news though. [Intel has released
programming manuals for some of it's graphics
chipsets](http://lwn.net/Articles/267436/). This means Keith Packard can
get some community assistance with the X.org intel driver and that [bug
11220](http://bugs.freedesktop.org/show_bug.cgi?id=11220) has a better
chance of getting fixed. Update: Dear Intel, Thank you. Thank you. Thank
you.
