---
title: On migrating between internet service providers
---

Apologies to anyone who got email to moreati.org.uk bounced or a 404
over the last week. I've been moving hosting provider, from Dreamhost to
Webfaction and ironing out some finer points of DNS configuration - I'm
a DBA Jim, not a network engineer. Thanks to standards and open source
software information services are becoming interchangeable commodities,
like electricity or water. Increasingly it doesn't matter which provider
one chooses, the differentiators are cost and bundled features. However
we're not totally there, one cannot export a complete domain from
provider A and import it to provider B. We may never be there\*, a gas
service has very little state and very little choice in how the service
is presented, everything is standardized. We in the ICT field still
invent unique and wacky methods to reach a goal. Some areas are further
behind then others in making a switch easy. In the UK Local Loop
Unbundling is in full swing. The incumbent provider - BT - is required
to allow competitors' to provide telephone/broadband by installing
equipment in local exchanges. The regulator requires that a transfer
from BT to an LLU provider can happen in a matter of days, with minimal
downtime. However in a curious limitation it is not possible to transfer
from one LLU provider to another. One must return to BT, incurring a
reconnection charge and (I believe) a 12 month contract, then migrate
from BT to the other LLU provider. How quaint.

\* Perhaps the closest we have gotten so far is the J2EE .war file.
